QUESTION 4 - MULTIPLE CHOICE - 15 POINTS 
(1.5 point each, no penalty for guessing) 
 
Find the best answer. If you need to clarify or make assumptions, state your assumption with the answer. No penalty for guessing. 
 
1. On a volumetric basis, the largest amount of waste product generated by a crude oil or natural gas producing well is usually which of the following: 

		a) Drilling mud from drilling activities 
			b) Salt water from production and fracturing activities 
		c) Condensate from gathering lines and pipelines 
		d) Drilling and production pipe 
		e) None of the above 
 
2. Under the ‘reasonable use doctrine’ a mineral owner or oil and gas lessee most likely could: 

		a) Utilize whatever amount of surface area they desired to drill a well 
		b) Drill a fresh water well and use that water for operations on the site 
		c) Build a refinery on the site to refine oil trucked onto the site if the use was reasonable 
			d) Inject salt water produced off the lease premises in injection wells on the lease 
		e) All of the above 
		f) None of the above 
 
3. The ‘reasonable use doctrine’ applies to: 

		a) Interstate pipelines that transport natural gas to cities such as Chicago 
		b) The local gasoline filling station seen on many street corners 
		c) Crude oil refineries and their related operations 
		d) Electrical distribution facilities and transformers at utility owned electrical generation facilities 
		e) Offshore drilling platforms and related underwater pipelines 
		f) All of the above 
		g) None of the above 
 
4. Under the ‘reasonable use doctrine’ a mineral owner or oil and gas lessee: 

		a) Is responsible for paying damages to the surface owner for the reasonable use of the surface 
		b) Is responsible for paying damages to the surface owner only for operations off the leasehold premises 
			c) Is responsible for paying damages only for an unreasonable use of the surface at the well site. 
		d) All of the above 
		e) None of the above 
  
5. In Texas the ‘accommodation doctrine’ supplements the ‘reasonable use doctrine’. What is required to invoke the accommodation doctrine: 

		a) The presence of ‘sour gas’, that is hydrogen sulfide in the natural gas product 
		b) A pre-existing use of the surface, among other factors 
		c) A state statute that encodes the accommodation doctrine, and the requirements 
		d) A regulatory finding by the applicable state agency that the doctrine applies 
		e) All of the above 
		f) None of the above 
 
6. In Texas, you buy an interest in an oil and gas lease and want to drill an oil and gas well. The surface is owned by a third party unrelated to the mineral owner. Which of the following is true: 

		a) The surface owner can keep you off the property until you settle prospective damages 
		b) The surface owner is the dominant estate, and has the power to stop mineral development 
			c) The lease owner will many times agree to pay damages to the surface owner and will enter into a contract specifying surface activity the partied agree to even if it is not required by law 
		d) All of the above 
		e) None of the above 
 
7. Higher commodity prices can make marginal properties that have environmental concerns economically viable for producers. In light of this fact, investing $1 on January 1, 2000, which of the following investment choices would have given you the largest return? 

		a) Natural gas prices, as measured by the Henry Hub spot price 
		b) Food prices, as measured by the FAO Food index 
		c) The U.S. stock market, as measured by the S&P 500 Index 
			d) Crude oil, as measured by the West Texas Intermediate benchmark 
		e) The U.S. stock market, as measured by the Russell 2000 Small Cap Index 
 
8. In Texas, you buy the surface and mineral rights to a 40 acre tract of land. The tract of land is damaged by oil and gas activities. With regard to a damage claim, which of the following is true: 

		a) Permanent damage will be measured by the cost of repair 
		b) Punitive damages are never awarded for oil and gas environmental damages 
			c) Temporary damages are measured by the cost of repair 
		d) None of the above 
 
9. In Texas, you operate a crude oil well for Pony Oil Co. Inc. It produces 10 barrels per day of crude oil and 45 barrels per day of ‘produced water’. Which of the following is true: 

		a) In general, most ‘produced water’ contains salts that can be dangerous to the environment 
		b) In general, the ‘produced water’ is disposed of in specially permitted disposal injection wells 
		c) In general, ‘produced water’ volumes increase over time as an oil well depletes 
		d) In Texas, the surface owner owns the rights to the ground and surface waters 
			e) All of the above 


10. In Texas, you are involved in a dispute with the surface owner regarding to the use of the surface on which you are drilling a well. No oil and gas lease provisions apply. The landowner claims you are using more surface than is reasonably necessary. Which of the following is true: 

			a) A well located in the City of Arlington (urban area near Dallas) may be considered a nuisance and an unreasonable use of the surface while the identical operation on a remote ranch in West Texas may not be considered an unreasonable use of the surface 
		b) Texas Railroad Commission regulations define what drilling activities constitute a nuisance and what constitutes unreasonable use of the surface 
		c) EPA regulations prohibit the use of an unreasonable amount of surface when drilling a well, and will hold a hearing on this issue on request 
		d) All of the above 
		e) None of the above