QUESTION 3 - ESSAY QUESTION - 40 POINTS 
FACTS: Sponge Bob thinks he might want to drill a second well on the McDonald farm deeper since he has 
heard rumors that productive formations may exist well below the current producing formation, but no-one 
knows for sure what is deeper. He also wants to treat the existing well by applying a massive ‘frac’ job to the 
well, injecting water and frac sand to open up the formations, after which he hopes some of the oil and natural 
gas from the adjoining lands might migrate to his wellbore. A friend also mentioned that he might get a 
compressor engine for his well to help ‘push’ the natural gas into the pipeline, and might help drain the 
formation (again, Sponge Bob hopes some of the gas will be ‘sucked’ from under the neighbor’s property). 

Question 3: Discuss Sponge Bob’s desire to drill deeper and operational proposals, including the following 
issues: 
 
(1) should Sponge Bob get seismic data before he drills deeper since no-one knows what is down there? 

		Attaining seismic data could theoretically save him a considerable amount of money, if it were a dry hole. Even if he wasn’t going to drill a dry hole in this example it would provide critically important information which would help him find the “best” depth to drill to. 

(2) if he gets seismic data, whose permission does he need to ‘shoot’ seismic? 

		Sponge Bob will need to gain permission from the surface owner in order to shoot seismic. 

(3) do you recommend he use explosives, or a vibro-truck, in shooting the seismic? 

		Explosives are a rudimentary way to obtain seismic data these days. Sponge Bob would be best to use a vibro-truck to shoot the seismic since it is more environmentally friendly and is something that would be appreciated by the residents near the area of which you’re shooting seismic. 

(4) if the frac job works, can Sponge Bob take ownership of his neighbors oil or natural gas if it migrates to his well, and 

		If the frac job works, Sponge Bob under the rule of capture, retains ownership of the oil and natural gas his well “sucks” up regardless of where it came from. 

(5) can Sponge Bob use a compressor to push the natural gas into a pipeline, or is that illegal? 

		Sponge Bob can use a compressor to push the natural gas into the pipeline. 

(6) any other issues you can think of we talked about in class dealing with these additional facts regarding Sponge Bob’s project. 
