Class 2 – Key Terms

Cash sale – 

Financing – 

Promissory Note – A document which serves as evidence that debt exists between a borrower and a lender and usually contains the terms under which the loan must be repaid and the rights and responsibilities of both parties. 

Amount – Generally the face amount of the note, which is usually advanced in total when the loan agreement is executed. 
Interest Rate – This could be a fixed rate of interest or an adjustable rate. 
Maturity – At which time all remaining amounts due under the terms of the loan are to be repaid. 
Terms of Payment – The dollar amount, due dates, and number of payments to be made by the borrower. 
Application of Payments – Usually are made first to cover any late charges/fees/penalties, then to interest, and then to principal reduction.
Default – Occurs when a borrower fails to perform one or more duties under the terms of the note. 
Late Fees – Specifies any grace periods during which late payments can be made up (usually with penalties) without the lender declaring that the borrower is in default (forbearance period).
Prepayment – Allows the borrower to make early payments, or to repay the loan, in part or fully before maturity. 
Nonrecourse – A provision in the note under which it will not hold the borrower personally liable in the event of a default. In this case, the lender may only bring an action to force the sale of the property serving as security for the loan. The borrower is released of personal liability. 
Recourse – The borrower is personally liable for payment of all amounts due under the terms of the note.
Loan Assumability – This clause indicates under what conditions, if any, a borrower will be allowed to substitute another party in his place, who will then assume the responsibility for remaining loan payments. 

Opportunity to cure – 

Acceleration – 

Usury savings clause – 

Secured / unsecured creditor – 

Deed of trust – 

Grantor/Borrower; Beneficiary/Lender – 

Trustee – 

Lien priority – 

Power of sale – 

Future advance clause / dragnet clause – 

Due-on-sale clause / due-on-transfer clause – 

No further encumbrances clause – 

Insurance requirement – 

Subordination – 

Assumption – 

Subject to – 

Additional property clause / Mother Hubbard clause – 

Seller financing – 

Contract for deed / installment contract – 




